01 - Introduction and "What is Communism?"

What consists of today's live? 
The live today will be a summary of basic principles of communism,
that is, if you are coming into contact with communism for the first time,
maybe this video would be a good way to start.
And my objective here is show the common basis of communism. 
And why do i say 'common basis'? 
Because exist different thinklines of communism. 
But i'll show the common basis of all these lines. 
Except some weird sects there.
Here will be see the really basic of basics.
In the end of this live, i'll show a reading guide, 
making avaliable all the books for free save one,
later we'll talk about that one, 
and sugesting a reading order, right? 
I strongly recommend that you read, don't use the video as a reference. 
It's really worth it read and reread even if you already master the topic for you lay into your head. 
It's also worth it to search for additional bibliography because what will show here its basic a lot, right? 
Really, really basic.
So, let's go: basic principles of communism. 
On here, i already want to thank Groselha Atômica. 
@panquetriste who make this wonderful art what's there in screen. 
I'd want to thank too Thales Caramante and João Carvalho 
who helped me with the script of this live. 
And i make a wish for you are a marxologist who has a phd in marxism. 
Please, understand that i'm talking in a basic, simplified way, right?
Don't need to quote Grundrisse,
the letters who Marx send for i don't know who, don't need, ok? 
We know you know a lot of Marx.
And fine, other day we talk about that, right? 
So, let's go: What's communism? 
Anticlickbait, definition in the screen:
The communism is the doctrine of the conditions of the liberation of the proletariat.
This is an Engels' quote, 
in the book called “The Principles of Communism”. 
So, first of all, don't be scared with the word 'doctrine'.
Doctrine means a set of principles.
Isn't like indoctrination, don't conflate 'doctrine' with 'tenet'. 
Today there is a lot of talk about indoctrination, 
and the people think this is permanently negative, right? 
So, communism is the doctrine of the conditions of the liberation of the proletariat.
 
In case someone don't know, what's proletariat? 
Proletarian is who lives from the sale of its labor power, who works in exchange for a wage.
 This is the proletarian. 
Moreover, what is the goal of communism? 
The communism crave a society without social classes, that is, a society without exploration of the human by other human. 
And a society without classes can only exist through a society without private property of the forces of the production. 
And, in the end, without state. 
Is a society free of exploration without social classes, without forces of production and without state. 
That's it. This is the communism. 
The communism has happen in the history? 
No, the Soviet Union was not a communist country, Cuba is not a communist country, the China is not a communist country.
Have classes? Is no communism. Have state? Is no communism. 
So the communism is we want to get to.
We'll talk about what Soviet Union, Cuba, China and etc. be or were. 
So, let's go. 
Who delineate for the first time those set of principles? 
Who describes? Who theorized those set of principles? 
And now we have to talk about him, right?
Karl Marx. Marx is the theorical most important of all the set of communist principles. 
Marx is absolutely unavoidable.
Is impossible be communist without read Marx. Impossible. 
First of all: marxism and communism are the same thing? 
No, marxism and communism not are the same thing, 
but them are deeply conected.
The difference between marxism and communism will be a bit more clear along of our exhibition, but remember they are not exactly synonyms, right? 
And what the marxism consists? What is marxism? 
Marxism contains three constitutive parts: A philosophical,
a economic and a political part. 
The philosophical part consists in the dialetical and historical materialism,
the economic part, in the criticism of the political economy,
and the political part, of the scientific socialism. 
These parts are not isolated from each other, right? 
They are not isolated. They are mix themselves, they interact. 
In these three parts, are the common basis of anyone communist. 
My goal here is not tell
the live story of Marx, Engels and Lenin, right?
I'll tell just a little of Marx's story to be
a bit more clear what i'm wanting to say. 
So, in 1818, Marx born in a town called Trier, which is in Prussia, where today is Germany. 
In the 1840's, he start to write for a Prussian newspaper
and he was banned from Prussia because he was
very critical of monarquists politics. 
Of Prussian monarquist politics. 
In 1844, he goes to France, exiled, 
and he meets a guy called Friederich Engels. 
The most longer mustache guy i've seen in my life. 
Engels was son of a industrial burgeois
and would become Marx's friend, intelectual partner and maecenas. 
And to who don't know, maecenas is who fund some project. 
So, yes, Engels was a burgeois' son, but Marx wasn't. 
Marx was studied Philosophy University of Berlim
and there he was of a group called Young Hegelians. 
Here has a illustration of the young hegelians. 
As the name says, Marx studing philosophy in University of Berlin, 
he has very influenced by ruling philosophy in Germany at this time which as the Hegel's philosophy. 
And there, in the 1840's, Marx and Engels start to elaborate 
a critique of the young hegelians. 
They start to diverge of the young hegelians
and of own Hegel. 
This critique that Marx and Engels do to Hegel and the young hegelians
will consists in the philosophical pillar of the marxism. 
And there i want to do a addendum, right? I want to beg leave. 
Maybe, in this live, maybe i'll start with the hardest. 
There's who says that the philosophical pillar of marxism is the hardest. 
But why i choose start talk about it first if it is the hardest? Because Marx formulated the other pillars from the philosophy.
The philosophical pillar was the first to be formulated. 
And this pillar give us the marxist method. 
So, if you are having a hard time understanding, 
know that isn't amazing. it is something that is quite usual. 
I took too long to understand this philosophical pillar.
Demanded a lot of reading. 
What i ask is that you give me a chance to try
at least get familiar with this vocabulary. 
In the end, as i said, i'll give some extra reading to try
to improve this process a littlle. 
So, let's go. Returning to the beginning of our explication. 
You're know that communism is
the set of principles of the labor class libertation. 
In other words to be more clear. 
The final goal is the end of classes, 
the private property of the forces of production and the state. 
And there must already be popping up in the minds of some people who hear
talk about it for the first time:
But isn't that utopian? Is this not idealism? 
Do you ever heard that communism is utopian? What is a utopia? 
The communists are idealists?

02 - Dialectical and Historical Materialism
Well, little do people that never got into contact with communism know 
but communism appears as a critique of utopianism
and a critique of idealism. 
Marxism's philosophical pillar is constituted 
as a critique of utopianisms and idealisms 
And that's what we're going to talk about now.
We'll talk about dialectical and historical materialism 
and the name already sounds scary, right? A philosophical curse word, 
and that's why I said that I might have chosen to start by the most complicated part, but I beg you give it a chance. 
Right then, Remember Marx was a Young Hegelian? 
Well, even though he was a harsh critic of Hegel's philosophy, 
Marx was heavily influenced by Hegel. 
But influenced in what way? 
Mainly regarding a thing called dialectics. 
So, dialectical and historical materialism, we'll begin
by talking a bit about dialectics. 
So what is dialectics? 
That's something we'd need ten tomes to answer, 
but I'll try and summarize. 
First of all, Hegelian dialectics was opposed to another philosophical method called metaphysics, which was the dominant philosophical method up to Hegel.  
In order for us to understand dialectics 
it's worth it to understand what metaphysics is
because one thing makes the other clearer.  
That's the part of the stream where I'll cite the most, ok? 
I'll avoid reading too many quotations 
but I think these ones are helpful
because this part is quite difficult.  
Right then, We've said that dialectics opposes metaphysics. 
Engels: "To the metaphysician, things and their mental reflexes, ideas, are isolated, are to be considered one after the other and apart from each other, are objects of investigation fixed, rigid, given once for all. He thinks in absolutely irreconcilable antitheses. His communication is 'yea, yea; nay, nay'; for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil. For him, a thing either exists or does not exist; a thing cannot at the same time be itself and something else. Positive and negative absolutely exclude one another". 
That's metaphysics then.
In summary: metaphysics is a method that works with isolated,
fixed categories.
Dialectics, on the other hand, another quote from Engels: 
"...comprehends things and their representations, ideas, in their essential connection, concatenation, motion, origin and ending. Such processes as those mentioned above are, therefore, so many corroborations of its own method of procedure".
That's referring to passages of this book I'm quoting, "Socialism: Utopian and Scientific" by Engels.
Dialectics is the philosophy that works with constantly moving categories that relate to each other by means of contradictions, of contraries.
So, a famous example Hegel gives, 
the master-slave dialectic.  
In summary, the master can exist only if there is a slave. 
Master and slave aren't fixed, isolated, unchanging categories. 
The category of master only exists through the existence of the slave category. Within the contradictions between master and slave. 
These categories change throughout History 
but I wont get too much into the master-slave dialectic.  
I'm just showing you how the categories that dialectics works
are interconnected and ever changing. That's it then. 
So, according to Engels, and I think that's a good analogy. 
Metaphysics cannot see the woods for the trees. 
For him and for Marx 
dialectics was much more adequate for understanding
not only natural sciences' phenomena, but also society's.  
An example of dialectics Engels gives in this book I quoted 
is Darwin's theory of evolution. 
Darwin's theory of evolution was a huge blow to metaphysics 
because it works with transformation, 
with historical change, on the very long term.  
It made it impossible to work with fixed categories, 
categories are now changing.  
They transform, they emerge and come to pass 
as History goes on.  
That's the dialectical principle of Marx's philosophy 
which is influenced by Hegel.  
Let's go to the other part then, it was dialectical and historical materialism 
Let's talk materialism. Materialism. 
I want you to do a mental exercise now. 
Look around you, wherever you are. Look around. 
Look at everything that surrounds you. 
Look if there's a table nearby, a computer, a cellphone,
a chair, anything.  
I want you to think about this: 
who made these things? Who manufactured them? 
If there's a chair where you are, who manufactured it? 
If there's a couch, who made that couch? 
And further, who transported it there? 
If the couch has metal parts, who mined the metals? 
Whose hands extracted them from the veins of the earth? 
Now I want you to reflect 
on how little we think about that.  
How little we think about who made the objects that surround us. 
And no, it wasn't machines, it wasn't just machines. 
We are surrounded by an immense amount of human labor. 
But we don't realize it. 
We're disconnected from the human labor that surrounds us. 
What is historical materialism, especially the materialism part? Materialism is the understanding that material production
is the basis for our social structure.  
Not only do we have to think about who made what is around us  
but what surrounds us is 
the basis upon which we organize society.  
The two things are connected. 
That's materialism's great trump card.
Let's go back to Hegel for a bit. 
Marx incorporated Hegel's dialectics. 
But materialism arises from a critique of Hegel. 
A critique of what exactly? Hegel was an idealist. 
Remember I said Marxism came around as a critique to idealism?  
And this critique of idealism is 
mainly a critique of Hegel's philosophy.  
So Marx takes Hegelian dialectics but  leaves out the idealism. 
Let's use a quotation from Marx himself then: 
My dialectic method is not 
only different from the Hegelian, but is its direct opposite. 
To Hegel, the life-process of the human brain, i.e., the process of thinking, 
which, under the name of “the Idea,” he even transforms 
into an independent subject,
is the demiurgos (for those who don't know, demiurgos means deity) of the real world,  
and the real world is only the external, phenomenal form of “the Idea.”  
With me, on the contrary, the ideal is nothing else than the material world 
reflected by the human mind, and translated into forms of thought".  
That's a quotation from Capital. 
Don't worry, I know it's complicated but I'll explain. 
For Hegel, reality is a manifestation of human ideas, 
a manifestation of human thought.  
And human thought in its turn is the manifestation of the original Idea
(with capital "i") that comes from the deity, from God.  
Hegel's philosophy has a theological outlook. 
And the Young Hegelians were also idealists. 
They believed that what prevented society's development
were the ideas in people's minds.  
There needed to be a revolution in people's thought 
and only then from reason and thought, we would transform reality.  
More than that, as capitalism developed 
there appeared philosophers that saw what was happening,
the rise of poverty, of misery,
and devised fairer, more egalitarian societies 
that would free all of humanity. 
Where? In their minds. 
According to Engels, the more detailed these societies were, the further they drifted from reality. 
These philosophers became known as Utopian socialists.  
For those who don't know, utopia is a 'non--place' 
Idealism means you create an idea in your head and try to apply it to reality. 
Materialism is the opposite of that.
Marx puts this idea upside-down. 
It's not reality that is created by our thoughts. 
But rather our ideas are an abstraction of reality. 
First we get into contact with reality
and then we formulate ideas, not the contrary.
And there is an inseparable connection between material reality,
the objects that are around us, and how we organize society. 
These two things are inseparable. 
There's no social organization without a material backing, a material substrate. 
There's no use in designing a society in our heads and trying
to apply it to reality while ignoring reality itself. 
That's materialism. That's the difference, right? 
So what is material reality? To make it clearer, 
it's not only nature, but also the way we produce 
Remember I told you to look around? 
That all produced in order to satisfy our material needs. 
We have to sit down, we make a chair. 
That's part of material reality as well. 
But not only that, our production also satisfies
our cultural and intellectual wants. 
Not only eating, clothing, housing but also what we desire
to consume as culture. 
This quote is by Marx and Engels 
"What they {the individuals} are, therefore, coincides with their production,
both with what they produce and with how they produce. 
The nature of individuals thus depends on the material conditions determining their production." 
What we are depends on how we produce our existence. 
What we are depends on how we eat, where we live,
what we wear, how we wear. 
It depends on that, on how we transport ourselves,
how we satisfy our needs. 
So the way we produce reality
we call it infrastructure. 
Our infrastructure is the production of food, of clothing,
of houses, etc. 
A social structure arises over this infrastructure. We call that superstructure. 
It's what is above the infrastructure. 
What is there in the superstructure? Culture, religion, morals, among other things. That is, our culture, our religion, our morals, are above. 
They are built upon a material basis. 
That is to say, for example, that our religion has
everything to do with how we produce our material reality,
how we produce our food, our houses, our clothes. 
That is all connected and we can never
loose sight of the material basis of reality. 
One thing depends on the other. 
Is this a mechanical process though? 
Does that mean that every time we produce food in the same way
the same religion will emerge? 
No, it doesn't mean that the same material basis
will always give rise to the same superstructure,
but that the superstructure is dependent on the material basis. Dependent. 
It is not mechanically determined by it, but dependent on it. 
This is really important;
once this superstructure has risen,
it impacts back on the material basis. 
So our culture, our religion, our morals can
impact on how we produce our reality. 
But it doesn't exist without that reality. 
That's a dialectical movement. 
Remember we said dialectics was important? 
In its connections, in its movement, and not in fixed categories. 
Infrastructure and superstructure aren't fixed, unchanging categories.
They are connected, they interact with each other and they move.
I know it's complicated, but give it a chance and at least
 get familiarized with this vocabulary: materialism, material basis,
 infrastructure, superstructure, dialectics, etc. 
So do you remember what was dialectical and historical materialism? 
Where does the historical part come in? 
This method is such that Marx and Engels perceive
 History through the ways people produced
 their reality in order to satisfy their needs and how that affected the social structure. 
So for Marx and Engels the first historical fact is
 the satisfaction of our needs. 
The first time a human built a tool in order to satisfy a need. Thats the first historical fact. 
From the moment we satisfy a need on, we create other needs. This is the historical process for creating new needs. 
The wheel of History keeps on turning
 as we satisfy our needs. 
So Marx and Engels look at History and ask:
how did they produce? From this production, what was the social structure? 
How does the social structure of said society relate
 to the way this society produces? 
That's historical materialism. 
For summarizing, there's a quotation that's a bit long,
 but it ties together everything I've said.  
"The materialist conception of history starts from the proposition that the production of the means to support human life and,
 next to production, the exchange of things produced, is the basis of all social structure;
 that in every society that has appeared in history,
 the manner in which wealth is distributed and
 society divided into classes or orders
 is dependent upon what is produced, how it is produced,
 and how the products are exchanged.  
From this point of view, the final causes of all social changes and political revolutions are to be sought,
 not in men's brains, not in men's better insights into
 eternal truth and justice, but in changes in the modes of production and exchange.
 They are to be sought, not in the philosophy, but in the economics of each particular epoch." 
This means that revolutions, including the bourgeois revolutions,
 didn't happen in the way liberals themselves describe it. 
The liberals say people started demanding more freedom 
and that propelled the revolution forward. 
No. Revolutions happen when our way of producing
 and reproducing life changes. 
Every revolution has a material basis, a material substrate. 
It doesn't appear in someone's mind and is then applied into reality
because that's impossible, that goes against the laws of nature. 
And that's what we call idealism.

03 – Critique of Political Economy
Marxism emerges as an opposition in a critique of idealism and utopianism, ok? 
So, pay attention in this last Engel's quote here:
"They are to be sought, not in the philosophy, but in the economics" 
That's what we are going to talk now: Critique of Economy. 
So one thing that I need you to pay attention is this:
Why I first explain through the philosofical pillar? 
The philosofical pillar give us the method. 
And Marx and Engels analyze everything from now using this method. 
Dialectical and historical materialism is always the perspective. 
This method is applied to reality to understand the reality. 
And now we move on to the Economic Pillar of Marxism. 
Remember I said that Marx was exiled in France and he met Engels there? So, Engels reads Marx's texts and he criticizes Marx's texts . He said: “Marx, there is an economic dimension missing from your analyzes” 
Then Marx closed inside a library
and he reads the writings of English economists,
especially these two in the screen: Adam Smith and David Ricardo. 
And I need to clarify now: 
Can you see that I'm using the term "Political Economy" 
Back then, "Political Economy" term was dominant
because it was clear that "Economics" and "Politics" were inseparable. 
As Burgeous Economy was becoming dominant, 
they discard the "political" to give an alleged neutrality for Economics. “No, no. Economics has nothing to do with Politics. Economics is Economics.
Economics is an exact science, we do a study of reality in a neutral way."
And for Marxists, until this day the expression used is "Political Economy", ok? Marxists doesn't disassociate economy from politics. Never.
By the way, I even put here, look. 
For those who don't know, Marx's masterpiece “Capital”, “Das Kapital”, 
it's written here: “A Critique of Political Economy”, 
“Capital". Critique of Political Economy", it's the subtitle. 
So the Marxist economy develops out
of a critique of the political economy of bourgeois economists. 
And some would say, just to make it clear for you, 
some would say there is no Marxist Economics, 
that Marxist Economics is a bourgeois economy's critique, 
but you'll see controversy about it . 
Just to let you know that this exists. 
What is the critique of Marx's Political Economy? 
It's an analysis of capitalism, basically. 
Marx lived at a time when capitalism was already dominant . 
But, what is capitalism, folks? What is capitalism? 
And I'm telling you, this Critique of Political Economy's excerpt will be where I'll immunize you with a mandatory vocabulary to understand Critique of Political Economy, ok? 
Here we are going to make a kind of glossary because it's needed, right? Truly understand; know how to describe what these terms means. 
I'm going to talk like that, with just the cam, and we'll recap later. 
Anyway, relax. 
What is capitalism? Capitalism is a mode of production, mode of production. 
What is a "mode of production"? Mode of production is the result of interactions 
between productive forces and relations of production. 
What are productive forces and relations of production? Productive forces are how humans act on nature. 
Relations of production are how humans act on each other. 
Therefore, we have an action on nature and an action on each other. The interaction between these actions results in the mode of production, right? 
Point number one: What are the capitalist productive forces? 
Capitalist productive forces are the employment of industry, machinery, 
energy matrices automation, and especially division of labor, division of labor.   
In Capitalism, out work is segmented, it is broken down into specialized small parts. 
Therefore, our capitalist productive force isn't just a machine, but it's how we divide up this work. 
What are relations of production? We talked about productive forces, now we have relations of production. 
Capitalist relations of production are based in the exploitation of Proletarian labour by the Bourgeoisie, ok? 
The foundation of the relations of production is the exploitation. 
We are going to explain about exploitation further ahead. 
First of all, that exploitation is based on a class division. 
What is Class? Class, folks, is a social division of labor. 
Are there classless societies? Yes. In classless societies 
everyone has to work, everyone benefits from the fruits of labor,  
and the labor is divided by ability or skill. 
This type of division we call it "Natural Divison". 
In class societies, there is no natural division, there is a social division. 
And what does it means? Imagine that you work on a factory . 
The factory owner isn't less skilled than you to work in the factory. 
So, why do you work at the factory and he doesn't? 
Since he has the same skills as you. 
Because he belongs to another class. 
What determines the class is which position you occupy in the producion chain. 
And under capitalism, these classes are increasingly reduced to bourgeois, 
In other words, the class that doesn't work and owns the means of production, 
and proletariat, the class that does work and owns nothing
other than your work force. 
What divides these classes is not skill, it is not ability, it is not vocation, it is social. 
Well then, another characteristic of relations of production. 
We have classes and one of them own the means of production, 
that is, these means of production are private private property. 
One of the central characteristics of capitalism is the Private Property. 
What is Private Property? There is a classical definition
of the bourgeois economists themselves: Private property is 
the free disposal of another's labor power. 
When we are talking about private property,
we are talking about private property of the means of production. 
Why did private property, and only "private property", 
became synonymous with private property of the means of production? 
Because the private property of the means of production was
the first form of private property. 
So, in the time of Marx,of Smith, of Ricardo, talk about private property was talk about private property of the means of production. 
Back to definition: Private property is
the free disposal of another's labor power. 
I give an example: remember that Mode of Production is
the interaction between productive force and relations of production? 
Did we have another Modes of Production? Yes. 
We had, for example, the feudal mode of production. 
We had, for example, the slave-owning mode of production. 
For example, in the slave-owning mode of production. 
What is private property in the slave-owning mode of production? 
The slave. Remember that private property is 
the free disposal of another's labor power? 
How does the slave owner disposes of the labor force of others? 
Owning the person. Another person's work is
freely available to the slaveholder.
 
The person is the owner's private property. 
How this works in capitalism? People are not the property of the capitalist, but the capitalist owns the means of production. 
Means of production, that is, what is necessary for the work execution is taken from the hand of workers, and the capitalists controls
the worker's productive forces through wage labor. 
Workers are forced to sell their labor power to work on the means of production that have been taken from their hands. 
And how this capitalist can take
these means of production out of the worker's hand? 
Because he owns something called "Capital". 
What is Capital? Capital can be summed up in a simple few sentences
"Capital is value that creates value"; "resources that creates resources";
"wealth that creates wealth"
Capital. Capital is money? No. But capital can be money? Yes. 
They aren't synonymous, it's that what I mean.. 
What you have in your wallet now isn't capital, ok? 
Capital is a resource that can be in form of money that is used in the acquisition of means of production . 
Factory, machine, land, energy, raw material and workforce. 
Once such means are acquired they become part of capital. 
So, factory, machine, energy, raw material are part of capital, ok?   That's why capital isn't just money. 
Therefore, in short,  capitalist relations of production are based 
on class division. One class owns the means of production and doesn't work, 
the other only owns its labor labor power and sells its labor power. 
What bring us the last characteristic of relations of production:
the Commodification of Social Relations.. 
In capitalism, the commodity is the center of social relations. 
In capitalism we don't produce our existence,
we buy our existence.. 
You don't produce your food, you buy your food. 
You don't sew your clothes, you buy your clothes. 
You don't build your house, you buy your house. 
And you sell your labor fource too,
your labor force becomes a commodity. 
But, what is a commodity?  Commodity is something that is produced
for someone else's comsuption, and to be traded on the market. 
This commodity element deserves more attention. 
Because, again, as commodity is the center of all
social relations in capitalism, it needs to be undestood. 
Before that, let's review everything. 
C'mon, vocabulary:
Mode of Production: interaction between productive forces and relations of production. 
Capistalism is a Mode of Production. 
What are Productive Forces: how humans act on nature. 
What are Relations of Production: how humans act on each other.
. 
What is Class: social division of labor (as opposed to the work natural division), 
position occupied in the productive process. 
Is class determined by how much work do you get? No. 
If you earn wages, you are a worker, ok? 
If you earn wages, you are a proletariat. 
"Ah, my salary is 100K/monthly", you are a proletariat. 
Class is determined by the social division of labor. 
Class is determined by where you are in the productive process. 
What makes it so confusing is that, nowadays, we use this terminology "Upper Class", "Middle Class",  "Lower Class". 
What determines class for Marxism is
the position you occupy in the productive process, right? So that's right. 
Private Property: free disposal of another's labor power.  
Remembering that we are talking about the private property of means of production. It's not your house, your old truck, your flip-flops. 
Means of production: what is necessary for the execution of work. 
Factory, raw material, energy. 
Capital: value that creates value, resource that creates resource, wealth that creates wealth. 
Commodity: something produced to be consumed by the other,
to be sold in the market, okay? 

So, let'go to a subject that is a bit more complicated, but fundamental to our understanding of Marx's critique of Political Economy. 
Remember that the commodity is the center of our social relations? 
This commodity has something called Value.  
So the question that comes up is: what is Value? How is Value determined? 
Ok, so I'll begin with a quote that made me understand Value once and for all. 
But I'll start with the quote and then we are gonna describe Value, not the contrary. 
"...if I say a quarter of wheat exchanges with iron in a certain proportion, or the Value of a quarter  of  wheat  is  expressed  in  a  certain  amount  of  iron, I  say  that  the  Value  of  wheat  and its  equivalent  in  iron  are  equal  to some  third  thing,   which  is  neither  wheat  nor  iron,  because  I suppose them to express the same magnitude in two different shapes. 
Either of them, the wheat or the iron, must, therefore, independently of the other, be reducible to this third thing which is their common measure.". 
I've never forgotten this quote. 
If a certain amount of wheat is equal to certain amount of iron, it does not mean that one is the same as the other, but that they are equal to a third thing. 
And this third thing is Value. Ok, so, Value. 
Value is maybe one of the most complicated concepts of Political Economy, even Marx recognized that. 
Marx says in the Introduction to Capital that the first chapter was the most complicated, and it is the one in which he describes Value. 
We have commodities in society, we buy our things.
These commodities have Value. 
Do you remember when I told you to look around and think about who made the things you have? 
All the objects you possess, all of them, without exception, has one substance in common. Do you know what this substance common to all the things you have is? Labour. 
Labour, folks, is a social substance. 
Every commodity has in it some amount of crystallized labour.  
Is Value the same thing as price? No, no. Is price Value, chat? No. 
Every time you think you're not understanding what Value is, be sure you're not  confusing it with price, ok? 
So, what determines the Value of a commodity?  
The labour socially necessary for the confection of this commodity. 
Folks, what has more Value, a glass or a car? Car. 
Why? Because the amount of labour needed to make a car is way bigger. Making a car requires way more labour than making a glass. 
Therefore, a car has much more Value than a glass. 
Does this mean that if I had a glass factory, and it took me the same amount of time needed to make a car, to make this glass, the glass would get more expensive? No, ok? No. For the love of God, no. 
Value is determined by the amount of socially necessary labour.  
The social criteria is fundamental.  
What determines Value is the amount of labour in a certain social state and under specific productive conditions of an entire society. 
It's how much labour an entire society needs to produce a glass, and not how much you, an individual, needs to produce a glass, ok?. 
And price? So, if Value is not price, what then is price? 
Price is the expression of value as money, expression in money.  
Price usually gravitates around value. 
This price that gravitates around Value, Adam Smith - the Adam Smith, not Marx - called it central price.     
Once a commodity is produced by labour and it goes out to be sold in the market. It (the commodity) will get closer to its value. 
Value is not price, value is a property of the commodity, and value is determined by the amount of socially necessary labour. 
Very well, remember we said that the commodity is the center of all social relations? 
In Capitalism, our labour power is also a commodity. 
We sell our labour power at market price.  
If our labour power is a commodity, and value is a property of a commodity. 
What is the value of our labour power? 
The value of our labour power is also determined by the socially necessary labour, 
but in another way, the value of your labour power is determined by all that reproduces you. 
It's the value of everything you need to exist.  
Food, clothing, roof, heating, etc.
All that you consume in order to exist has in it the socially necessary labour needed to produce it. 
The Value of your labour power is the sum of the values of all the things you need in order to exist.  
And, in Capitalism, specially, with an extremely unqualified workforce,  the labour power's value gets really close to the bare minimum you need to maintain your existence. So, when you sell your labour power in the labour market, that's why we call it labour market, you are selling it by your value, and the value of your labour power is determined by what you need to keep existing.  
And this you can derive from reality, folks. 
Your salary is being paid to you so that you can buy what you need to continue existing.. 
Why is all of that so important?
Because understanding what value is makes us comprehend the greatest discovery of Marxist Political Economy, which is the Surplus Value.

Without understanding value, we would not understand surplus.
"Surplus (valia)" can also be "surplus value".
Got it? To understand surplus value, we need to understand value.
So: according to Engels, the discovery of the surplus value is a discovery in the same magnitude as Darwin's Theory of Evolution. Why?
Because it can expose, strip naked, the internal mechanisms of exploitation.
When we talk about exploitation in Capitalism, folks, we are not judging it.
We are describing the mechanism of Capitalism. 
Talking about exploitation in Capitalism is not a judgment on moral grounds, it's merely descriptive.
And this is only understood when your understand what value and surplus value are.
So, let's go over it again: what determines the value of a commodity is the socially necessary labour contained in this commodity. 
Who does this labour?
It's the worker, not the bourgeois.  The bourgeois doesn't work, who works is the worker.
Very well, after working and creating this value, in exchange, the worker receives a wage.
But the wage of the worker is equal to the value of his labour power, and not the value he created while labouring! 
That means that while the worker is working, labouring, he creates value, creates value, creates value, but he receives the equivalent to the value of the labour power in the form of a wage.  
That is, what he creates has no connection with what he receives.
What he receives has a connection with what he needs to live.
Imagine the following: If you have an 8-hour workday
and in four hours you produce the equivalent value of your salary,
the other four hours you worked for free.
This free labour we call it surplus labour .
The value created in this surplus period is appropriated by the bourgeois in the form of the surplus value.
Surplus value is the mechanism by which the bourgeois profits. 
And we have three types of surplus value:absolute, relative, extraordinary.
Absolute surplus value expands as the labor hours expand.
Remember what I said? You need 4 daily hours to generate the value of your salary, and your workday has 8 hours.
Out of a sudden, your workday goes up to 10 hours, without a wage increase. You've created more surplus value.
Absolute surplus value: the workday increases, so the capitalist's profit increases.
Relative surplus value: imagine that you work 8 hours a day, but the factory got optimized.
Instead of producing x chairs, you produce, in the same amount of time, 2x chairs. 
But you receive the same salary.
You increased the extraction of value in a relative manner; the labour time needed is the same, but you can produce way more.
And the extraordinary surplus value has to do with the production of the same objects, of the same commodities, but in other companies.  
For example: if there are many companies producing chairs, and one of them discovers a much faster way to produce, when this commodity goes to the market, it, being sold at a similar price as the others, will yield more profit.
So, extraordinary surplus value is relative towards the industry as a whole, when some company discovers a way to lower their costs.
This surplus value tends to find an equilibrium in two ways: either when some other company also gets optimized, or when one company breaks all the others creating a monopoly.
And the point is: the final goal of every bourgeois is the increase in the extraction of surplus value. The increase. The increase.
This is not a moral judgment.
Marx at no moment makes some moral judgment.
He doesn't say "it's bad", "good", "ugly", "stupid", "melon face".
Saying that the goal of the bourgeois is the increase of surplus value is descriptive, because this is observable, we can verify it in reality. 
And what is important here?
As profit is extracted by means of the surplus value, the bourgeois incorporates this profit back to their capital.
When surplus value is extracted, the bourgeois reinvests it in production to increase the extraction of this surplus value.
They finess more each time this extraction, in a endless and incessant cycle. 
Capitalism has shown cyclical crisis since its beginnings.
Already in the 70's of the 19th century, Engels talks about seven crises of capitalism. Seven! In the 19th century.
This is when capitalism was way smaller than it is today; when it was restricted to only a couple of countries.
So, let's wrap it up?
Marx's critique of Political Economy focuses in analyzing capitalism.
Capitalism is a mode of production based on the employment of big industries. in the division of labour, in class society, in private property, in the commodity as the center of social relations and in the constant expansion of capital.
Let's recap some concepts. We have seen value and surplus value.
Value: it is a "property of the commodity".
And this property is "determined by the socially necessary labour.
Surplus value is the "value created by the worker which is appropriated by the bourgeois", and that doesn't return to the worker.
This surplus value can be: "absolute", when the working hours increase; "relative", when productivity increases; and "extraordinary" when the productivity in relation to other factories increases. Ok?
And why is all that important?
Weren't we going to talk about communism? Why are we talking so much about capitalism?
Understanding the capitalist mode of production is necessary so we can walk towards some other mode of production, transform our productive forces and our relations of production.
Remember we said that Marxism and Communism have an aversion towards utopianism?  towards utopia, idealism?
Every Marxist analysis, every, starts from material reality. 
This is Marx's object of study: observing capitalism's reality, the reality in which he was living.
Ok? And then, we go to the last pillar of Marxism 

which we call scientific socialism.
05 – Scientific Socialism
so, by now we've got a basic, and I mean really basic, analysis
of the way capitalism works, then what?
we've seen that capitalism explores and throws us in poverty.
so, what do we do with this? 
very well, capitalism has developed our productive forces at a novel way .
it brought an unprecedented level of productivity, unknown to humanity by then.
however, at the same time, it thrown a huge part of humanity into misery,
A huge chunk of people was proletarianized, lost everything they had,
and turned to selling their work force for /in exchange of the bare minimum to survive
while bearing strenuous work hours.
so, how did we sharply increase productivity and poverty as the same time?
how did we enlarge machinery and automation levels and work load simultaneously? 
why is it that there's more and more automation and work load never decreases?
those are the contradictions that will be our target in this next analysis.
okay, next: "Analyzing Capitalism",
we've come to the conclusion that capitalism is based in exploration, right?
this being, the first thing we can know for a fact is:
there are no exploiter without exploited, this has always been the case, right?
guys, there where always exploiters and the exploited?
Lets dig into that.
we know, also, that the mechanism of exploitation comes through private property.
Marx, through the method (dialectical and historical materialism),
come to the reasoning that there has not always been private property.
and not just that, he also found that there has been different kinds of private property throughout history .
the same goes to social classes, those weren't always in the scene,
throughout history, social classes are quite a lot different.
what can we take out of this observations of Marx?
it's that the existence of social classes and private property
it's linked to a certain phase of the development of production.
Whats so relevant about that?
Essa conclusão do Marx faz com que a gente consiga enxergar
que essas organizações sociais, essas organizações humanas, não são indispensáveis.
Private property isn't necessary for human society.
Social classes aren't imperative for human society.
So, the notion that there will always be employers and employees is false..
Não só isso; através da análise material do capitalismo,
o Marx chega à conclusão de que a gente já tem recursos para marchar em direção a outra sociedade,
com outras relações sociais.
Então, vamos lá, uma citaçãozinha aqui do Marx para a gente debater,
uma citação do Manifesto Comunista:
“Uma epidemia, que em qualquer outra época teria parecido um paradoxo,
desaba sobre a sociedade - a epidemia da superprodução.
...The conditions of bourgeois society are too narrow to comprise the wealth created by them.”
what is that Marx mean here?
By the first time in history, human society was dealing with the inverse of the it's usual problem.
until then, society had only dealt with the lack of production issue.
society had an scarcity trouble.
the capitalist mode of production brought a new problem: excess of production.
the catch is: there's only excess of production on capitalism
for the capitalist means of production are illogic, are irrational.
capitalism does not produce in order to satisfy our needs, it does to sate the needs of the capital.
If production doesn't become capital it is discarded.
That is to say/meaning, the capitalist means of production jeopardize our productive capability.
we're hindered from producing more and better due to capitalism.
So according to Marx, the capitalistic ways are obsolete. OBSOLETE.
They need to be transformed.
Is such transformation possible? Not only possible. according to Marx, it's very likely. Why?
Throughout capitalism's development, it creates its own contradictions
which will be what brings its downfall, unavoidably.
By expanding, capitalism generate proletariats 
proletariat by proletariat, more ,more and more 
This class that it creates, is the one which antagonizes it..
Marxism's greatest asset was to perceive that there are not only the classes,
and that those classes are unavoidably antagonistic to each other.
They'll never reach harmony, for they have contradictory interests/goals.
To this antagonism between the two main classes of capitalistic society,,
we named class struggle. Class struggle.
For Marxism, each and every doctrine, each and every set of principles
that attempts to balance classes, harmonize classes are utopic. 
it's fallacious  It's a front.
If there is an exploited class, there will be a exploiter class above it/  the dominant class will always stand atop the dominated one. Every time.
The Utopians, which we talked about before, had no perspective of any class.
They sought a society which balanced all of humanity.
having perspective of the classes is knowing that they are antagonistic.
it is fundamental to what we call Scientific Socialism; which is how Engels name it.
This expression appeared to contrast with Utopic Socialism.
So, why does this matters?
According to Marx, class struggle between bourgeoisie and proletariat
will lead to a rupture with capitalism.
Whats relevant about Marx is that not only he identifies classes
he also credits revolutionary protagonist to the exploited class.
The proletariat becomes the revolution's Subject. 
The proletariat belongs to the class that will conduct revolution, unlike the Utopians.
Utopians believed that the working class were unable to lead any change.
That any change would come from top-down.
Marx said otherwise: it would come bottom up

06 – Ditadura do Proletariado
E de que forma essa ruptura vai ser conduzida?
A classe proletária, tomando consciência de si, vai se organizar
e tomar o poder do Estado e instituir uma coisa chamada ditadura do proletariado.
O que significa ditadura do proletariado?
Para o Marx, nós vivemos numa ditadura da burguesia.
O Estado não surge como um aparato que equilibra a sociedade.
Vocês vão ver gente idealista, até hoje, falando que o Estado surge
para amenizar os conflitos da sociedade. No.
Para o Marx, o Estado é um aparato de violência específica de classes.
O Estado surge para que a classe dominante mantenha a classe dominada no seu devido lugar,
através da violência.
Na sociedade capitalista, quem detém o aparato estatal é a burguesia.
O Estado é instrumentalizado pela burguesia para manter a burguesia no poder. Ok?
Então, para o Marx, nós vivemos numa coisa chamada ditadura da burguesia.
Se tem capitalismo, tem ditadura da burguesia.
Ora, se o Estado é necessariamente um aparato de violência específica de classes,
quando a classe trabalhadora tomar o Estado, ele não vai continuar sendo isso?
Sim, exatamente. Só que essa pirâmide vai se inverter.
O Estado é um aparato de violência específica de classes;
com a classe trabalhadora tomando o aparato estatal,
ela vai utilizar do aparato do Estado para, através da violência,
erradicar a burguesia como classe.
O Estado é um aparato de violência específica de classes, e ele continuará o sendo.
Então, o Estado nas mãos da classe trabalhadora vai oprimir a burguesia até ela desaparecer,
e conforme as outras classes vão desaparecendo, o Estado se torna obsoleto.
Uma vez que não há mais classes para oprimir, o Estado não precisa mais existir,
e ele definha. Ele desaparece. Ele se torna inútil.
Essa é a visão de transição do socialismo para o comunismo do Marx.
Essa é a maneira como o Estado é extinto na visão marxista.
Tudo bem? Então, vamos voltar aqui.
“O socialismo científico: demonstra que a existência das classes
está ligada somente a determinadas fases do desenvolvimento da produção”.
Elas já não existiram. Elas podem deixar de existir.
Com a propriedade privada, a mesma coisa.
“A luta de classes conduz, necessariamente, à ditadura do proletariado”,
e “essa ditadura nada mais é do que a transição à abolição de todas as classes,
e a uma sociedade sem classes”.
Essa é a grande descoberta do Marx.
E aqui, a gente tem de fazer uma pequena observação:
eu tenho usado os termos socialismo e comunismo,
só que a gente precisa diferenciar uma coisa da outra.
Então, primeiro; socialismo e comunismo
só passam a ter o sentido que têm hoje depois da Revolução Russa.
O socialismo é a etapa de transição para o comunismo.
No socialismo, a classe trabalhadora vai estar no poder
e vai oprimir a burguesia até que as classes desapareçam.
No comunismo, as classes já não existem mais.
O Marx não usa esses termos.
O Marx usa “primeira fase da sociedade comunista” e “fase superior da sociedade comunista”.
A razão pela qual, depois da Revolução Russa, se troca os termos,
é histórica, e ela tem razão de ser.
Ela faz sentido na época em que ela surgiu.
Mas saibam que, daqui para frente, eu vou usar “socialismo” como transição
e “comunismo” como destino.
Outra coisa; o Marx não determina as características específicas do socialismo.
O Marx era um materialista. Pra ele, qualquer previsão ou qualquer receita era idealismo.
Toda sociedade deve partir de uma análise material. Real, tá? Não ideal.
O Marx não pode cometer o mesmo erro que ele criticou nos utopistas.
Então, o Marx só dá ideias gerais: socialismo é classe trabalhadora no poder,
ditadura do proletariado e transição em direção a uma sociedade sem classes.
Por isso que, todas as vezes que perguntam “quantas marcas de sabão em pó vai ter no socialismo?”,
tudo o que a gente responder vai ser só especulação. Não tem como saber.
A gente só vai saber os detalhes a partir da experiência.
E os soviéticos detalham muito mais o que é o socialismo. Why?
Porque eles tiveram uma experiência socialista! O Marx não tinha.
Logo, ele não ousou ficar prevendo o futuro para além do que ele sabia que era possível.
Ele sabia que era possível a classe trabalhadora tomar o aparato estatal;
sabia que era possível a classe trabalhadora usar o aparato estatal para oprimir a burguesia;
ele sabia que era possível. E foi possível. E foi feito!
Tudo isso foi feito a partir da análise material.
Outra coisa; isso significa que, depois da revolução,
no dia um do socialismo, todas as contradições vão embora?
Sumiu contradição. Morreu o capitalismo, morreu qualquer opositor, morreu tudo.
No. Citação do Marx:
“Aquilo com que temos aqui a ver é com uma sociedade comunista,
não como ela se desenvolveu a partir da sua própria base,
mas, inversamente, tal como precisamente ela sai da sociedade capitalista;
[uma sociedade comunista], portanto, que, sob todos os aspectos
- Econômicos, de costumes, espirituais -,
ainda está carregada das marcas da velha sociedade, de cujo seio proveio”.
Então, aqui, só lembrando:
nessa citação, o Marx está usando a palavra comunismo como a gente usa palavra socialismo hoje, tá?
Aqui, o Marx está falando da primeira fase do comunismo.
Por isso eu tive de esclarecer o vocabulário, aqui.
Qual é a questão aqui? Uma sociedade sai do ventre da outra, gente;
e com isso carrega suas marcas de nascença.
Se nós temos uma sociedade capitalista machista e nós passamos por uma revolução,
a sociedade nova vai continuar sendo machista. Essa contradição não vai desaparecer.
A questão é que a nova sociedade nos dá a possibilidade de superar o machismo,
sendo que o capitalismo não dá.
O capitalismo não dá a possibilidade de superação de várias contradições.
“Ah, mas e Cuba? Cuba não era misógina? Cuba não era homofóbica?”
Cuba tinha saído de uma sociedade misógina e homofóbica.
O estranho seria se ela não fosse no dia um da revolução.
Então, não dá para a gente generalizar o socialismo, também,
porque cada experiência socialista vai sair de uma experiência capitalista diferente;
com suas particularidades e com suas contradições particulares. Ok? 
Sobre o marxismo era isso.
Nós temos: materialismo histórico-dialético, economia política, socialismo científico.

07 – Partido leninista e Guia de Leitura
Agora, a gente vai para a última parte básica que é necessária e imprescindível.
A gente vai falar do Lenin, agora.
Esse Lenin.
Right then, Por que a gente está falando do Lenin?
A essa altura, você já deve saber que a primeira revolução bem-sucedida
de caráter socialista foi a Revolução Russa de 1917.
Sobre a Revolução Russa, e sobre toda a experiência soviética,
eu precisaria fazer uma live separada.
Só que hoje a gente vai falar do líder máximo dessa revolução,
que é o Vladimir Ilyich Ulianov, ou Lenin.
Porque o Lenin é o maior marxista depois do Marx e do Engels.
Para quem não sabe, o Lenin é um grande teórico.
E não só grande, ele é incontornável.
Foi por causa do trabalho teórico do Lenin que a Revolução Russa foi possível.
E por que o Lenin é tão importante? Porque o Lenin dá uma dimensão operacional para o marxismo,
ele desenvolve um método para a aplicação prática do marxismo.
E tem vários elementos do que a gente chama hoje de leninismo, mas hoje eu só vou falar de um,
que talvez seja o central, que é o partido.
E vamos lá, vamos falar do partido.
Desde a época do Marx e do Engels já se sabia que era necessário organizar a classe.
O que o Lenin fez? Ele observou a realidade, assim como o Marx e o Engels faziam,
viu como a classe se organizava, e propôs uma nova forma de organização.
Essa nova forma de organização a gente vai chamar de partido leninista.
E aí a questão é o seguinte: quando a gente pensa em partido,
a gente pensa em várias legendas, com siglas, que disputam as eleições parlamentares.
Disputam o Congresso, disputam o Executivo.
Eu vou adiantar uma coisa para vocês: partido leninista não é isso.
Inclusive, ele não tem a menor intenção de ganhar as eleições, tá?
O partido leninista não surge para ganhar eleições.
O que é o partido leninista?
Partido leninista é o destacamento organizado da classe operária.
Já dizia Lenin, frase dele:
“O proletariado, na sua luta pelo poder, não tem outra arma senão a organização”.
O partido leninista, diferente dos partidos que disputam eleições,
se organiza sobre uma base revolucionária.
A ideia do partido é preparar e mobilizar a classe para a tomada do poder;
não de forma pacífica, mas de forma combativa.
A tomada do poder precisa ser feita de maneira combativa,
porque a classe dominante não vai ceder o poder de maneira voluntária.
Na Rússia, esse partido era o partido bolchevique.
Quais são os elementos desse partido?
Primeiro; o partido deve ser o destacamento de vanguarda da classe. O que significa vanguarda?
Vanguarda é um termo militar. Vanguarda significa quem está na frente, é o contrário de retaguarda.
A vanguarda são os melhores elementos da classe trabalhadora:
os trabalhadores mais experientes, mais dedicados, mais revolucionários, mais esclarecidos.
Esse partido deve se armar com uma teoria revolucionária;
outra frase do Lenin, famosa também:
“sem teoria revolucionária não há movimento revolucionário”.
Só que esse partido ele não pode servir apenas para absorver o que a classe trabalhadora pensa.
Surge o partido, e aí a ideia não é ver o que a classe trabalhadora está pensando
e representar a classe a partir do que ela está pensando de maneira espontânea.
O partido tem de armar a classe com a teoria revolucionária;
porque, para o Lenin, a classe trabalhadora se organiza de forma espontânea.
Só que essa organização da classe trabalhadora é limitada.
A classe, quando se organiza de forma espontânea,
costuma lutar pela melhoria da sua condição imediata
— Melhoria de salário, redução de jornada, direito trabalhista —
mas ela não luta pela derrubada do sistema. Why?
Porque ela não consegue enxergar o mecanismo desse sistema.
Como o capitalismo é um sistema, é uma síntese, é uma abstração,
você não consegue chegar para o trabalhador, apontar e falar “o capitalismo está ali”.
Mas ele consegue ver que ele não consegue pagar as contas,
ele consegue ver que ele está trabalhando demais,
ele consegue ver que quando ele fica doente ele se ferra.
Isso ele consegue ver. E aí a classe vai se organizar.
Só que o partido não pode ficar só absorvendo essa demanda.
Ele tem de armar a classe com algo além. E esse algo além é a derrubada do sistema!
É por isso que esse partido precisa estar à frente da classe.
E veja bem, não é acima! Não é acima. É à frente! É à frente.
O partido tem de ser o chefe político da classe. Why?
Porque ele pode armar a classe com a teoria tática revolucionária.
Só que esse partido nunca pode se desconectar das massas.
Ele tem de ter os destacamentos avançados da classe, mas não se isolar da classe.
Ele tem de estar ligado nas massas e ele tem de convencer as massas.
O partido precisa trabalhar em proximidade com toda a classe trabalhadora
para ganhar crédito moral e crédito político através do exemplo, através do convencimento.
E, para isso, ele precisa ser organizado. O que isso quer dizer?
Dentro de um partido leninista, a disciplina deve ser férrea, só que voluntária.
Quando você entra no partido, você se submete voluntariamente a uma disciplina de ferro.
E isso é para despertar o espírito revolucionário nas classes, através do exemplo.
Isso quer dizer que o partido deve ser a única organização?
No. Não deve. Não pode, inclusive.
A sociedade tem de ter uma série de organizações de classe:
sindicato, cooperativa, organização, associação, juventude.
No caso da Rússia, uma muito importante: os sovietes.
Os sovietes, gente, são os conselhos de fábrica que foram feitos de maneira espontânea.
A questão é: o partido não consegue trabalhar em todas as áreas da classe trabalhadora sozinho.
O partido deve trabalhar em proximidade com essas organizações
para conectar essas organizações em prol da luta emancipatória.
Ele deve centralizar a tática dessas organizações.
Como? De forma forçosa? Não, através do convencimento.
Os membros do partido vão entrar nessas organizações, conversar com os trabalhadores,
convencer os trabalhadores, demonstrar a necessidade da luta pelo exemplo,
se aproximar dessas organizações e conquistar o apoio político das massas.
O partido bolchevique fez exatamente isso.
O partido bolchevique não fez uma revolução enquanto ele não tinha conquistado maioria nos sovietes.
Os sovietes eram os principais órgãos da classe trabalhadora;
o partido trabalhava próximo dos sovietes
tentando o tempo todo convencer os sovietes da necessidade de uma revolução,
conseguiu convencer a classe, ganhou maioria nos sovietes, e aí sim conduziu uma revolução.
O Lenin não só teorizou, ele fez! Ele aplicou!
Vocês estão entendendo a importância do cara?
Então, o partido tem duas funções (resumindo, tá?):
conduzir a classe para a revolução e, depois da revolução, manter a revolução;
ou seja, ele tem uma função pré, uma função pós-revolução.
Independentemente do que você achou de tudo o que eu falei;
“ah Ian, não gostei. Não gostei. Achei o partido... ruim. Achei autoritário. Não gostei”;
independentemente do que você acha, esse método do Lenin é extremamente eficiente.
Já ouviram falar em China? Cuba? Coreia? Vietnã? Albânia? Burquina Fasso?
Todos, todos usaram o método leninista.
Independentemente do que você acha, o partido leninista é um método extremamente eficiente
para a tomada de poder pela classe. Extremamente eficiente.
Right then, Vamos revisar?
“Partido”. O partido leninista é: o “destacamento organizado da classe”.
Esse destacamento deve ser de “vanguarda”; ou seja, estar à frente da classe, não acima,
Esse partido deve estar “armado com teoria”, teoria revolucionária.
Esse partido tem uma disciplina voluntária e férrea.
Esse partido “deve mobilizar a classe para a Revolução”, e depois da revolução “deve manter a revolução”.
Isso é o partido. Tem vários, vários, vários outros elementos leninistas sobre organização
e sobre outras coisas.
A questão é: o Lenin era um monstro. O cara escrevia compulsivamente.
Quando ele teve um derrame, os médicos tiveram que pedir pelo amor de Deus
para ele parar de escrever, para ele não morrer.
Ele ficou limitado a escrever dez minutos por dia para não ter outro derrame.
O Lenin é uma máquina de marxismo. Então, para entender organização de verdade, tem de ler o Lenin.
Tem de ler de verdade.

Vamos para o final, gente?
Lembra que eu falei que ia dar um guia de leitura para vocês se aprofundarem?
Então, vamos para o nosso guia de leitura, e o que eu vou falar é o seguinte:
eu vou sugerir uma ordem, e vai ser essa ordem que eu vou apresentar aqui.
Todos os livros, menos este que está na tela,
vão estar disponíveis de forma gratuita na descrição do vídeo.
Right then, Se você, depois de ver a live, ainda estiver se sentindo inseguro,
leia esse livro do Grespan, “Marx: uma introdução”.
É um livro super curto que serve para introduzir todo mundo no vocabulário marxista,
e eu recomendo até para quem quer aprender a ensinar marxismo, porque é um livro bastante didático.
Aí, o primeiro texto que eu sugiro depois dessa live
é um texto minúsculo do Lenin chamado “As Três Fontes e as Três Partes Constitutivas do Marxismo”.
É um texto que o Lenin inscreveu no aniversário de 30 anos de morte do Marx,
e o Lenin fala quais são as fontes marxistas
que têm justamente esses três elementos de que a gente falou: filosofia. política e economia.
Recomendo muito a leitura, é um texto muito pequenininho e bastante esclarecedor.
Lembrando que o Lenin não teve acesso a todos os textos do Marx, e nós temos acesso hoje.
Então, tem texto aí que está faltando, simplesmente porque ele não teve acesso.
Próximo. São dois juntos aqui, ó:
“Princípios Básicos do Comunismo” do menino Engels,
e “Manifesto do Partido Comunista” dos meninos Marx e Engels.
Um pouquinho de história para vocês:
o Marx e o Engels, na década de 40, entram em algo chamado Liga dos justos.
O que era a Liga dos Justos?
Era uma organização de egressos da Alemanha,
que era uma mistura de idealismo alemão com socialismo utópico.
O Marx e o Engels entram na liga sob a condição de poderem alterar a linha política da liga.
Então, eles: mudam o nome da Liga dos Justos para Liga dos Comunistas;
trocam lema o de “todos os homens são irmãos” para “trabalhadores de todos os países, uni-vos!”;
e ficam encarregados de escrever o programa da Liga.
Na primeira reunião da Liga, o Engels vai, o Marx não.
E aí o Engels fica encarregado de escrever e ele escreve esse livro, “Princípios Básicos do Comunismo”.
Só que ele escreve em forma de catecismo, em perguntas e respostas.
O Marx não gosta do formato de catecismo e propõe o formato de manifesto.
E aí, eles juntos escrevem “O Manifesto do Partido Comunista”.
Esse primeiro livro do Engels, Princípios Básicos do Comunismo, nunca foi publicado.
Não em vida, ele foi publicado depois.
Tem tópicos que o Engels não responde, porque ele era um rascunho.
O Manifesto Comunista é um livro muito importante,
porque ele é o primeiro livro mais bem acabado do marxismo com todos os seus elementos centrais.
Ele tem três coisas importantes: uma análise histórica como ponto de partida;
a perspectiva de classes como eixo;
e colocar classe proletária como revolucionária, como sujeito revolucionário.
O Manifesto do Partido Comunista é o documento político mais importante da história.
Esse documento mudou o mundo. Vale a pena ler e reler e ler de novo.
Mais: em 1877, o Engels já velho, já maduro, escreve um livro chamado “Anti-Dühring”,
que é uma crítica à filosofia de um cara chamado Eugen Dühring.
O Engels faz uma crítica tão concisa, e expõe de maneira tão competente o marxismo,
que o livro faz um sucesso meio inesperado.
E aí ele extrai três capítulos do Anti-Dühring, que é um livro grande,
e publica na forma desse livro aqui: “Do Socialismo Utópico ao Socialismo Científico”
no qual ele fala sobre alguns pensadores utópicos
e contrapõe com o pensamento do materialismo histórico-dialético.
Esse é bem interessante, igualmente curto, vale muito a pena ler.
Mais um: “Salário, Preço e Lucro”.
O Salário, Preço e Lucro é uma palestra que o Marx deu em 1865 na Associação Internacional dos Trabalhadores.
E, nesse livro,
o Marx justamente está falando sobre como o salário não está relacionado com o preço da mercadoria.
E aqui, para explicar isso, ele explica valor e mais-valia.
Então, eu recomendo também. É um texto curto porque é uma palestra;
e eu recomendo como o primeiro texto do Marx sobre a crítica da economia política.
Aí, se você estiver se sentindo ousado;
crítica da economia política, o magnânimo do Marx: “O Capital”.
O Capital são três calhamaços, três livros enormes, assim, que demorou 16 anos para ele escrever.
Vale a pena ler. Mas, se você não estiver se sentindo tão ousado, vou recomendar um outro livro:
“Manual de Economia Política” da Academia de Ciências da União Soviética.
É um livro igualmente gigante;
mas ele tem, por conta da experiência soviética, um trecho que O Capital não tem,
que é sobre o modo de produção socialista.
Então, se você tem essas dúvidas do tipo: “como é a organização do trabalho no socialismo?”,
“como é a mais-valia no socialismo?”, “como é a fábrica no socialismo?”,
“como é o modo de produção?”, e tal; esse livro fala sobre isso.
Eu recomendo esses dois, tá? Mas são livros gigantescos,
não são livros para você deixar na cabeceira e ler toda noite, é para consultar.
Mais um: “A Ideologia Alemã”.
O Lenin não teve acesso a esse texto. Esse texto é um texto que o Marx e o Engels escrevem em 1846,
criticando os jovens hegelianos, e é o melhor exemplar que a gente tem sobre materialismo histórico.
Apesar do livro ser gigante, eu recomendo só o primeiro capítulo, o mais importante, que é o “Feuerbach”.
Esse livro foi o que eu li na faculdade para entender materialismo histórico.
Ele parece grande, mas na verdade só o primeiro capítulo é o mais essencial.
Mais um: “Crítica do Programa de Gotha”.
“Ah, Ian, eu nem sei o que é Gotha. Por que eu leria esse livro sendo que eu nem sei o que é Gotha?”
O Programa de Gotha era o programa da unificação dos partidos operários alemães.
O Marx, ao criticar o programa de unificação desses partidos,
expõe muito mais a respeito do socialismo.
Então, ele fala sobre: ditadura do proletariado, primeira fase do comunismo,
fase superior do comunismo, fala sobre o papel do Estado.
Ele fala sobre o período de transição do socialismo para o comunismo.
Esse livro é muito importante; ele é muito curto, também. Muito curto.
E aí, passando para o Lenin. A gente fala o tempo todo: “leia Lenin, leia Lenin!”. 
Vamos ler Lenin, então, né?
Primeiro livro: “Que Fazer?”. O Que Fazer é um livro que o Lenin escreve em 1902,
para o Segundo Congresso do Partido Operário Social-Democrata Russo.
O Lenin fazia parte de um partido nessa época, o Partido Operário Social-Democrata Russo,
e ele escreve esse livro para apresentar as ideias de partido dele,
que virariam o Partido Leninista, no Congresso.
Esse livro é um exemplar perfeito de como o Lenin pensava a organização partidária revolucionária.
Mais um: “O Estado e a Revolução”.
Esse livro é um livro que é até bom ler como o primeiro livro do Lenin, também. Why?
Aqui, o Lenin fala sobre o papel do Estado numa revolução
— Muito parecido com o que o Marx faz na Crítica do Programa de Gotha —
falando sobre qual é o papel do Estado uma revolução, como a classe trabalhadora deve gerir o Estado,
para que isso serve; e o que é o Estado, ele teoriza o Estado, também.
Esse livro aqui, se vocês forem ler, é Marx e Engels de cabo a rabo.
Aqui vocês conseguem ver como ele dominava o assunto.
E, por último, uma parte da teoria leninista que eu não falei, mas que é igualmente importante.
O Lenin identifica que o capitalismo entrou numa nova fase: a fase imperialista.
O capitalismo se expande de tal maneira
que ele se torna capitalismo monopolista, e os países do centro do capitalismo
começam a disputar a divisão do território do planeta Terra por recursos.
O Lenin teorizar a nova fase do capitalismo foi o que tornou possível a Revolução Russa, gente.
Então, esse livro aqui é essencial, porque o imperialismo ainda é nosso maior inimigo.
Entender o papel do imperialismo no capitalismo global
é fundamental para qualquer perspectiva revolucionária, qualquer uma.
Eu vou deixar todos esses livros de forma gratuita na descrição, gratuita.
Todos estão disponíveis no marxists.org, em português, menos esse aqui.
Esse aqui, como o senhor Jorge Grespan não precisa pagar as “contas” dele,
esse livro aqui precisa ser “adguirido” (adquirido).
Mas é isso, gente. Essa foi a live de hoje, “Princípios Básicos do Comunismo”.
Espero que vocês tenham aprendido alguma coisa.
É uma live que eu fiz para ser consultiva, e eu estimulo vocês a fazerem perguntas, tá?
Se vocês quiserem me perguntar alguma coisa que ficou pouco clara, podem perguntar.
Eu só não prometo responder rápido, porque eu tenho recebido muitas mensagens.
Mas eu dou o meu melhor porque como professor eu preciso tirar dúvidas desse tipo também.
