01 - Introduction and "What is Communism?"

What consists of today's live? 
The live today will be a summary of basic principles of communism,
that is, if you are coming into contact with communism for the first time,
maybe this video would be a good way to start.
And my objective here is show the common basis of communism. 
And why do i say 'common basis'? 
Because exist different thinklines of communism. 
But i'll show the common basis of all these lines. 
Except some weird sects there.
Here will be see the really basic of basics.
In the end of this live, i'll show a reading guide, 
making avaliable all the books for free save one,
later we'll talk about that one, 
and sugesting a reading order, right? 
I strongly recommend that you read, don't use the video as a reference. 
It's really worth it read and reread even if you already master the topic for you lay into your head. 
It's also worth it to search for additional bibliography because what will show here its basic a lot, right? 
Really, really basic.
So, let's go: basic principles of communism. 
On here, i already want to thank Groselha Atômica. 
@panquetriste who make this wonderful art what's there in screen. 
I'd want to thank too Thales Caramante and João Carvalho 
who helped me with the script of this live. 
And i make a wish for you are a marxologist who has a phd in marxism. 
Please, understand that i'm talking in a basic, simplified way, right?
Don't need to quote Grundrisse,
the letters who Marx send for i don't know who, don't need, ok? 
We know you know a lot of Marx.
And fine, other day we talk about that, right? 
So, let's go: What's communism? 
Anticlickbait, definition in the screen:
The communism is the doctrine of the conditions of the liberation of the proletariat.
This is an Engels' quote, 
in the book called “The Principles of Communism”. 
So, first of all, don't be scared with the word 'doctrine'.
Doctrine means a set of principles.
Isn't like indoctrination, don't conflate 'doctrine' with 'tenet'. 
Today there is a lot of talk about indoctrination, 
and the people think this is permanently negative, right? 
So, communism is the doctrine of the conditions of the liberation of the proletariat.
 
In case someone don't know, what's proletariat? 
Proletarian is who lives from the sale of its labor power, who works in exchange for a wage.
 This is the proletarian. 
Moreover, what is the goal of communism? 
The communism crave a society without social classes, that is, a society without exploration of the human by other human. 
And a society without classes can only exist through a society without private property of the forces of the production. 
And, in the end, without state. 
Is a society free of exploration without social classes, without forces of production and without state. 
That's it. This is the communism. 
The communism has happen in the history? 
No, the Soviet Union was not a communist country, Cuba is not a communist country, the China is not a communist country.
Have classes? Is no communism. Have state? Is no communism. 
So the communism is we want to get to.
We'll talk about what Soviet Union, Cuba, China and etc. be or were. 
So, let's go. 
Who delineate for the first time those set of principles? 
Who describes? Who theorized those set of principles? 
And now we have to talk about him, right?
Karl Marx. Marx is the theorical most important of all the set of communist principles. 
Marx is absolutely unavoidable.
Is impossible be communist without read Marx. Impossible. 
First of all: marxism and communism are the same thing? 
No, marxism and communism not are the same thing, 
but them are deeply conected.
The difference between marxism and communism will be a bit more clear along of our exhibition, but remember they are not exactly synonyms, right? 
And what the marxism consists? What is marxism? 
Marxism contains three constitutive parts: A philosophical,
a economic and a political part. 
The philosophical part consists in the dialetical and historical materialism,
the economic part, in the criticism of the political economy,
and the political part, of the scientific socialism. 
These parts are not isolated from each other, right? 
They are not isolated. They are mix themselves, they interact. 
In these three parts, are the common basis of anyone communist. 
My goal here is not tell
the live story of Marx, Engels and Lenin, right?
I'll tell just a little of Marx's story to be
a bit more clear what i'm wanting to say. 
So, in 1818, Marx born in a town called Trier, which is in Prussia, where today is Germany. 
In the 1840's, he start to write for a Prussian newspaper
and he was banned from Prussia because he was
very critical of monarquists politics. 
Of Prussian monarquist politics. 
In 1844, he goes to France, exiled, 
and he meets a guy called Friederich Engels. 
The most longer mustache guy i've seen in my life. 
Engels was son of a industrial burgeois
and would become Marx's friend, intelectual partner and maecenas. 
And to who don't know, maecenas is who fund some project. 
So, yes, Engels was a burgeois' son, but Marx wasn't. 
Marx was studied Philosophy University of Berlim
and there he was of a group called Young Hegelians. 
Here has a illustration of the young hegelians. 
As the name says, Marx studing philosophy in University of Berlin, 
he has very influenced by ruling philosophy in Germany at this time which as the Hegel's philosophy. 
And there, in the 1840's, Marx and Engels start to elaborate 
a critique of the young hegelians. 
They start to diverge of the young hegelians
and of own Hegel. 
This critique that Marx and Engels do to Hegel and the young hegelians
will consists in the philosophical pillar of the marxism. 
And there i want to do a addendum, right? I want to beg leave. 
Maybe, in this live, maybe i'll start with the hardest. 
There's who says that the philosophical pillar of marxism is the hardest. 
But why i choose start talk about it first if it is the hardest? Because Marx formulated the other pillars from the philosophy.
The philosophical pillar was the first to be formulated. 
And this pillar give us the marxist method. 
So, if you are having a hard time understanding, 
know that isn't amazing. it is something that is quite usual. 
I took too long to understand this philosophical pillar.
Demanded a lot of reading. 
What i ask is that you give me a chance to try
at least get familiar with this vocabulary. 
In the end, as i said, i'll give some extra reading to try
to improve this process a littlle. 
So, let's go. Returning to the beginning of our explication. 
You're know that communism is
the set of principles of the labor class libertation. 
In other words to be more clear. 
The final goal is the end of classes, 
the private property of the forces of production and the state. 
And there must already be popping up in the minds of some people who hear
talk about it for the first time:
But isn't that utopian? Is this not idealism? 
Do you ever heard that communism is utopian? What is a utopia? 
The communists are idealists?

