The Bridge Between Gender and Organising
Farah Thompson
	Being out as a Black trans woman takes a lot of wondering, thinking, and fighting. You can be well-versed in the street life of Los Angeles, know a lot about US Imperialism in the Middle East, or have studied in meticulous detail the history of the rise and fall of white feminist thought in America. But what gets through to people is a willingness to look into someone else’s eyes, and face them. And that hasn’t been easy for me. I can’t always get people to care or to see me, no matter how nice, smart, or hardworking I am. You’d think I’d just retreat inward, and live only for myself. But I can’t. Not while I’m still gendered. Not while I’m still deemed a body made for extraction and consumption. And not while even those who rhapsodise in public about how critical they are about exploitation, privately still see me as an adversary, a traitor, and perhaps a resource.
	My own gender journey was harsh. I was outed by my abuser when I moved out of my old home eight years ago. I left behind my journal, which she then exposed to my immediate family and others. It contained all of my private feelings about my identity, my hopes, my dreams. And a drawing of a woman with a penis. After I left, my abuser sent me a text message saying that my ‘aberrant’ behaviour is the result of me being possessed by a demon that leapt out of my grandmother’s VHS copy of The Crying Game. Then she pledged to never speak to me again. She reached out to me again almost two years later. Out of familial guilt, I told her that I have a normal girlfriend now, feeding her a lie that I am conforming to the heterosexual, patriarchal, and upwardly mobile dream she and most of my immediate family forced upon me since I was six. But on 4 July, when I finally came out to her and asked for her to call me by my name and pronouns, that was the last straw. She berated me, told me that my name is ‘a fetish’, and tried to get me into a hotel room using the last dollars I had. I just walked away. Afterwards she told me, ‘I ain’t fucking with you any more’. I haven’t spoken to her since.
	I will probably be dealing with people who are like my mother, in varying degrees, for the rest of my life. People asked me lots of questions about my identity throughout middle school and high school, often in mocking tones. Because of this, I found myself spending a lot of time at home, in online communities, learning about queer history through anime, furry, and gaming fandoms. I resented being assigned male and the social impositions that came with it. I approached things like Xena: Warrior Princess, Sailor Moon, fashion, and other sources of momentary release out of pure love. But I couldn’t embrace these things openly, not without a heavy dose of corrective violence.
	Over time my embrace of ‘feminine’ things and behaviour came out of spite. I treated my increasingly obvious bisexuality with the same contempt. The only people who could offer comfort were my school teachers and my late grandmother, who encouraged me to try to love myself even when I was at my worst. But self-love only goes so far in a racist society that hates you for failing to be that ‘strong, handsome young man’ expected of you.
	In a Jehovah’s Witness household, that would eventually turn to other religions and beliefs, I was expected to embody all the usual aspirations my parents had for their first-born child. I was told to take my hands off my hips, and to walk on the outside of the sidewalk when a woman is around. I was told only the most rudimentary and idealised things about love, duty, and sex. I was given no advice on how to reconcile this with vivid memories of domestic violence and divorce. I was scolded for crying after a fight. I was told that I would be a great husband with a beautiful wife and kids. Sex at a young age with an older girl was supposed to be a source of pride according to friends, and my abuser joked about me finally becoming a man because of it. This was me eating the Fruit of Knowledge early, both in regards to the ‘gay shit’ I was told I wasn’t supposed to be interested in, and learning how women (too) can subjugate and dominate. Same with friends later in life as I shared with them my shady encounters with porn directors in my home city, a mix of mocking admiration and victimblaming. I have been punished and mocked for my sexual experiences, some good and some bad, while being told to live up to nebulous standards of manhood.
	Before I knew I was trans, I would spend a lot of time on the internet and in libraries. And, at first, I found more comfort and power in the writings of women than men. I looked through the writings of Mary Daly, bell hooks, Andrea Dworkin, Alice Walker, and others. Women whose words were meant to break down the world and provide avenues for freedom, but did so by reducing masculinity to a pathology. Or by embracing my manly self-stylisation for womanhood’s empowerment. I took this example to mean that my own small way of doing good would be by trying to understand why I was miserable, and then dealing with it through forms of harsh self-discipline directed towards some possible transcendence. I would refuse to pick fights or fix my lisp, but in another way I would struggle against myself. Sometimes this feminist selfeducation would give me something to fill the void from years of abuse, a framework to understand why I suffered. Through it I found some solidarity with others (especially those who had read this same literature). But other times I’ve witnessed that knowledge be deployed as a way to make oneself out to be better than the people they’re supposed to be liberating, with everyone outside the group treated like diseased, dangerous people. Victims of patriarchy, who either have to be saved or eliminated.

