And as far as I understood it, a failed man like myself is still a man. I was still a probable threat. ‘Self-discipline’ could be demanded of me in ways that could never be reasonably imposed on those readily accepted as women. If I was nothing but a failed man with a fucked up voice, a desire for true love and ambitions to boot, then the least I could do was reduce my collateral damage. That was how I understood myself, in relation to my abuser, to my sister, and to any other woman who stood next to me – even in admiration. Maybe I would never be an outright good person, but at least I could try not to repeat the echo of male domination. I could resist the regulatory violence that has defined my past, and still serves as the focus for my neuroses.
	The thing is though, that only gave me temporary comfort. I still felt chained. I still hated my body, and would spend nights interrogating myself in front of the bathroom mirror. All of my self-monitoring for signs of evil maleness did nothing to combat the misery. They offered me no new communion with the (other) women around me. And while I was able to do some good and make friends, I still felt broken. My neurosis spilt out the longer people knew me. Simple words sent me over the edge. Over the years I’ve learned that I am just an echo of someone else’s expectations, and that my humanity is contingent on responding to that. From being someone’s ghetto fucktoy, to being considered a possible school shooter for being too introverted, to being a bigots’ token they can lean on while speaking broadly about heavy concepts to whoever listened. None of that displaced the alienation I felt. Sure, I wasn’t the spitting image of a domestic abuser from a TV crime drama. But I still wasn’t given room to be a whole person. To be whole meant being ‘dangerous’ and barred out of the few ‘safe spaces’ I was permitted to be in.
	So it is with femininity – whether innate or compulsory, a matter of what you call yourself, or the judging gaze of someone else. As I try to be free from heterosexual, masculine expectations, I want to be seen. People had seen me as a strange, awkward boy for over 20 years. And perhaps still do, given their furtive stares and fumbling of my name and pronouns when I’m in the room.
In ‘boy mode’ I had friends and relationships, but I was still expected to live up to the same toxic norms even with people who claimed to be against them as marginalised people themselves. Other times I did wrong and apologised to a neurotic degree, wishing that the disease I apparently had by being assigned male at birth would just melt away. A few people even questioned me on my gender, noticing how much time I spent around trans women online, and reading their literature. But I did not allow myself to be forgiven for living through all of this. After all, if I am really a girl or am really a worthwhile, innocent person, I should not have lived like this. I should not have made mistakes like a man, overshared to a friend and had them tell me how irritating I am to talk to, wore the wrong clothes, said the wrong things, used the wrong tone of voice.
Poor and Black, I had a difficult time feeling like a person, much less a woman.
	To their credit, bell hooks and Alice Walker at least laid out capitalism’s role in racialisation and gendered exploitation. Working through their writing and speeches, I’ve found portions of their struggle to be a lot more nourishing for my contemporary fight. I struggle alongside those who quote them often. Even so, I’m not sure if they would like me. bell hooks in particular has condemned the trans women subjects of Paris is Burning, as if people like us are problematic reifications of gendered oppression. Alice Walker’s anti-Semitism seems to suggest the same reflex of hostility towards minorities, scapegoating us for society’s ills. That these are the attitudes of supposed radical theorists hasn’t helped my sense of isolation.
	As much as people talk about the virtue of marginalised people, to this day I’m caught in waves of shame and fear. There are days where I feel that none of my marginality or struggle justifies me even waking up in the morning, just because of guilt. Sometimes I hate myself for not adhering to the performance of what a woman is supposed to be. I find myself falling short of matching an ever-shifting ideal, whether that’s docile or hypercritical, because of a battle between my survival and what wider society allows.
