I’m only seen as myself half of the time, the ugly and beautiful alike. One night, two older gay men kissed me all over in a favourite dive bar of mine. I’d arrived wearing makeup and told them that I am trans. One of them said to the other, ‘I think she might make me switch’. A lesbian bar welcomes a friend and me, wearing makeup and a dress, but I’ve heard stories from other trans women who have been harassed here.
	A night out is no longer the only place to find oneself. My body is plastered all over parts of the internet, because I put it there on occasion. I sometimes talk about my sex life with joy while fielding messages from guys with dicks for avatars in my inbox. A popular Tumblr blog I used to follow to learn about radical feminism equates sex with trans women to corrective rape. I interact with all of these things, only showing parts of who I am, worrying if I am overstepping my line, doing the wrong things, and being the wrong person at that moment, as if it is all a moral imperative I should’ve answered in advance. One guy with a miniDV camera back in Pasadena may still have a video of me accidentally saying my deadname when I was supposed to be using a pseudonym.
	Working while trans aggravates the indignities of work in general. I was often misgendered while talking on the phone at my last tech job, with occasional correct guesses because of my chosen name and what my voice sounds like over a fuzzy VOIP call.
	I can’t decide which of these parts of me are acceptable. I can only dissect them, share them, act from them, and hope that somehow my efforts are deemed acceptable, productive, and materialist by the people I work with. Some of the things I share are ‘too abstract’ in some circumstances, triggering in others, and only a small part of what I provide survives the deliberate filtering of others. There’s a line I have to be conscious of at all times when I speak, so I can be considered rational, civil, and materialist. Materialism is a kilogram, with social consensus as the treaty, and the force of that consensus represented in the NIST’s shiny platinum-iridium cylinders. But like all measurements, it can change.
	I still wrestle with all this, as I collaborate with organisers and community members today. I got here out of a broad anti-war stance. Like millions around the world, I saw the war on Iraq as an injustice, pushed to action by images of protests across the globe on the cover of the Los Angeles Times.
	During Occupy and in my newer social circles, I saw in real time how socialist organising gave people frameworks to care for others and advance their interests in a common struggle, from people striking against student debt and crowdfunding for basic/debt payoff, to online communities where sex workers detailed encounters with police who preyed on them in the name of ‘public good’. Even with their differences, by the time Black Lives Matter worked in Ferguson, multiple people gave historical and contemporary perspectives on what led up to that point. Suddenly a lot of things clicked.
