The conversations with my late grandmother about the gutting of mental health care under the Reagan Administration, which affected her and a cousin who struggled with schizophrenia. My experiences with the police in Compton under Three Strikes Law, passed by the Clinton Administration. The aftermath of the 1992 LA Riots. Katrina. As marginalised as I am, without people bringing together the totalising nature of class struggle into the streets and through media, I would have been even more isolated. Without class consciousness, my work would be much more limited.
	But it’s still hard. Black folk have been siloed into advocating for themselves while also expected to sacrifice ourselves for others for years. These expectations have then been further divided by gender and class. I see my position as not unlike that of Sylvia Rivera and Marsha P. Johnson, queers who have been placed in lines between labour, advocacy (for oneself and others), and marginalisation. While cis people like to parade around us, get some fashion tips and illicit pleasure from us, show support for us in the abstract, we are still treated like either dirty secrets or used to buttress their own egos. If we dare go any further than the image of clean, palatable gayness that is projected onto us, we get tossed to the kerb, and even killed.
	But Blackness is often coerced, in and out of gender, in service of ‘the greater good’. So separatism on trans lines serves as no more a solution for me than organising in mass parties. My Black skin is considered a threat almost everywhere I go. If I came to separatism, by what basis could I trust that other separatists have my back? Angela Davis in Reflections on the Black Women’s Role in the Community of Slaves spoke of Black women being both gendered and depersonified to fulfil particular roles as ‘women’, but in a manner much different to white women. Their affirmation as ‘women’ was in service of extracting labour from them, for capital and white supremacy.
	I think of how my affirmation as a Black trans woman could serve similar ends. Trans women are often placed front and centre. In the media we’re represented as objects of prurient fascination, illicit transgression, or more often, vilification, and sometimes we’re even invited to do the work. But that is not the same as being seen as human. We serve some purpose which is not our own, proving a point about the experiences of those who do not share our experiences (the more reliably human). And then, we’re gone. Assuming we’re even the same ‘we’, by that point.
	Our gender divergence can’t be divorced from how race has been used to divide, conquer, and harvest entire peoples in association with gender. Expressions that were once tolerated, even cherished, in some pre-colonial societies are now subject to debates about them being ‘Western influences’ by reactionaries in post-colonial Nigeria and elsewhere. And if we are quick, and correct, to point out the racist class contradictions in the first and second waves of Western Feminist organising and theory, how separate are we as trans women from those contradictions when we wish to organise for ourselves because of the failures and misunderstandings of people in the broader left? From where I see it, we can’t be separate. As gendered subjects we carry the burdens of others, fairly or not, simply because of the nature of identity and its use for justifications of exploitation in the West and beyond. Systems that uphold some and depress others to reproduce themselves implicate all of us to varying degrees, because the very mode of reproduction we take for granted is so pervasive that even good deeds may be steeped in blood.
