The only way trans women can answer all these pressures is by force, force alongside other marginalised peoples, because force is all we are allowed to be defined by. Force from dominant actors sets the limits of our subjugated life. If every step we make forms craters anyway, why retreat? If we displace space and time, and a presumed peace, just by standing around, where can we really hide? In this shifting context, poverty and pathologisation become the only stable things, and from that ethereal ground, we blossom. Through my work, I had to be more assertive and tough than I’ve ever been. These are things that were desired by my abuser, but are uncouth and read as predatory by the wider public. Leaning into being scary, even during moments of vulnerability, just to get a word in.
	As much as some may be repulsed by me using the canvas of force to help enact positive change, there are limits to eloquent words and gentle pleas. Not all our battles can be won through deflating conflicts, clearly worded reasoning, and reconciliation. Fascists respond to power more than they do other people being right. It is the power of protesters, armed with organisational knowledge and taking collective action, which pushed Milo Yiannopoulos into bankruptcy. The gun control laws and the minimal amount of welfare US citizens get today are responses to the power of the Black Panther Party organising alongside drug users, children, mothers, and perpetually unemployed people in Watts and beyond, who mobilised people that orthodox communist parties in the US dismissed. Power is the core reason why the right is waging campaigns in Latin America, India, Australia, Canada, and elsewhere, with the coup in Bolivia and another coup in Brazil, the force of which ousted Lula and assassinated Marielle Franco in Brazil before bringing Bolsonaro to power.
	Simply showing up for others is the only thing that gives even the possibility of victory. It’s how I navigate my life as an artist, sex worker, and occasional employee. I fill everything in-between with self-reflection, and however much energy I have to wade through awful opinions and astroturfed popularity campaigns on social media. In this case the very concept of Che’s love for humanity is a verb, one I’ve had to carry with me into spaces much different to ones he probably had in mind. But largely on the same grounds of resistance to imperialism and colonialism. For Black trans women, there is always a tension between force and grace, between taking up too much space and being civil. Organising is confronting these interpersonal problems on a much wider scale. I don’t know how long my comrades will stick with me, or how much of me is acceptable or good, yet I feel duty-bound to see it to the end.
	I’ve seen the good that can be done when one steps out of oneself, carrying difference and pain with them, and working with others. I’ve seen people talk all of those things out almost as much as I’ve seen people fracture over them, seen them used as assets as much as they get derided as a waste of space. In these spaces, sometimes it falls on me to bring up the uncomfortable just to make sure everyone is on the same page, and I’m not always able to do that. I await the reprisal for speaking up like I await my abuser’s words and fists. But a good group makes the discussion of the uncomfortable possible and for one to come forward, battered by alienation, yet still be able to learn and contribute. I’m happy to say that I have found that space. But it’s still up to me to catch myself, in or out.

